as things now stand, the course of instruction in american history in
our public schools embraces three distinct treatments of the subject.
three separate books are used. first, there is the primary book, which
is usually a very condensed narrative with emphasis on biographies and
anecdotes. second, there is the advanced text for the seventh or eighth
grade, generally speaking, an expansion of the elementary book by the
addition of forty or fifty thousand words. finally, there is the high
school manual. this, too, ordinarily follows the beaten path, giving
fuller accounts of the same events and characters. to put it bluntly, we
do not assume that our children obtain permanent possessions from their
study of history in the lower grades. if mathematicians followed the
same method, high school texts on algebra and geometry would include the
multiplication table and fractions.

there is, of course, a ready answer to the criticism advanced above. it
is that teachers have learned from bitter experience how little history
their pupils retain as they pass along the regular route. no teacher of
history will deny this. still it is a standing challenge to existing
methods of historical instruction. if the study of history cannot be
made truly progressive like the study of mathematics, science, and
languages, then the historians assume a grave responsibility in adding
their subject to the already overloaded curriculum. if the successive
historical texts are only enlarged editions of the first text--more
facts, more dates, more words--then history deserves most of the sharp
criticism which it is receiving from teachers of science, civics, and
economics.

in this condition of affairs we find our justification for offering a
new high school text in american history. our first contribution is one
of omission. the time-honored stories of exploration and the
biographies of heroes are left out. we frankly hold that, if pupils know
little or nothing about columbus, cortes, magellan, or captain john
smith by the time they reach the high school, it is useless to tell the
same stories for perhaps the fourth time. it is worse than useless. it
is an offense against the teachers of those subjects that are
demonstrated to be progressive in character.
